docs: :memo: why FigJam decision post (#120)
seedcase-project/decisions: why-figjam/index.qmd

date: "2024-10-25"
categories:
  - collaboration
  - retrospectives
---

::: content-hidden
Use other decision posts as inspiration to writing these. Leave the
content-hidden sections in the text for future reference.
:::

## Context and problem statement

::: content-hidden
State the context and some background on the issue, then write a
statement in the form of a question for the problem.
:::

As part of the design cycle for the Seedcase Project, we do all our
developments in iteration which generally run for about three weeks. At
the end of each iteration, we have a retrospective meeting where we
discuss what went well, what didn't go well, and what we can improve.
After having worked with an external consultancy, we have been using
FigJam for our retrospectives. This has been a great tool for us to
collaborate and share our thoughts and ideas. However, we need to make a
decision on whether we should continue using FigJam for our
retrospectives or if we should look for an alternative tool.

## Decision drivers

::: content-hidden
List some reasons for why we need to make this decision and what things
have arisen that impact work.
:::

> The decision to look at our retrospective tools was primarily driven by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The decision to look at our retrospective tool was primarily driven by
```

the fact that the FigJam board we use is hosted by the consultancy

> company we worked with at the end of 2023. We have been assured that we

Reviewer: ```suggestion
company we worked with at the end of 2023 to early 2024. We were assured that we
```

> are more than welcome to keep using it, but it is not really a
> sustainable solution. We should have a board where we are the owners,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are more than welcome to keep using it, but it means that we don't have full control over it, nor is it a
sustainable long-term solution. We should have a board where we are the owners,
```

and which can't suddenly disappear because someone decides that former
clients should no longer have access to their accounts. To start with,
we were convinced that we couldn't use the free version of FigJam, so we
started looking for alternatives. We collected information on a variety
of online open access tools, but more importantly, collated a list of
requirements and features that we need for our retrospectives. Towards

> the end of this exercise, we found out that we could use the free

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the end of investigating into other tools, we learned that we could use the free
```

> version of FigJam, and that it would be easier to continue using it than
> to switch to a new tool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
version of FigJam.
```

> 
> Having done all the work, we decide to write up our results in this
> post, so that we can refer back to it in the future, should we at some
> point need to revisit our decision. This means that the rest of this
> post won't conform to the usual decision post format, but will instead
> be a summary of our findings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

I'd prefer you did include and compare the other tools, so we don't need to do it again if we do decide to change later, plus, it would give a fair comparison of the options available.

> ## Requirements and features needed for an online retrospective session

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Requirements
```

The requirements and features we identified as necessary for a good
retrospective session can be divided up into three categories.

> The first is the creation of the issues (good, improvable) on virtual

Reviewer: Not sure what `good, improvable` means here. Could you expand/clarify that?

post-its, the second the organisation of these cards, and the third the
overall functionality of the board.

> ### Cards

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Cards
```

The following features are needed for the cards:

-   They should be easy to create, edit, and delete.
-   They should not have a maximum length (or it should be quite long).
-   They should be movable.
-   They should have clear ownership.
-   They should be easy to read.
-   They should be able to have different colours.

We have not assigned a priority to these features at this point in time,
as we expect to continue with the current solution, but should we in
future wish to change then we will need to make a prioritised list.

> ### Organisation of cards

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Organisation of cards
```

The following features are needed for the organisation of the cards:

-   It should be easy to group cards.
-   It should be possible to keep groups of cards visually separate.
-   It should be possible to move groups of cards.
-   It should be possible to add comments and actions to cards.

>     -   this should be possible to follow on screen for all
>         participants.
>     -   there should not be a maximum length for comments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    -   This should be possible to follow on screen for all
        participants.
    -   There should not be a maximum length for comments.
```

-   It should be easy to convert cards to actions/issues.
-   It should be easy to navigate the board and get a visual overview of
    the cards.

At present we don't see a need to be able to vote on cards, and likewise
there is no need to archive or search for specific cards. This could
change and should not be discarded as possible features for the future.

> ### Board functionality

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Board functionality
```

The overall functionality of the board and individual sessions should
include the following:

-   It should be possible to save a retrospective session.

>     -   this includes a timer function to keep the session on track.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    -   This could include a timer function to keep the session on track.
```

-   It should be possible to archive a session, so that it is easy to
    refer back to it.
-   It should be possible to share the board with all participants.
-   It should be possible to have multiple users on the board at the
    same time.
-   The board should be accessible to all participants at all times.
-   The board should be hosted online, so that it is easy to access from
    anywhere, and not dependent on a specific machine to be running.
-   It would be nice to have a number of fun elements (stickers, emojis,
    etc.) to make the session more engaging.

We don't see a need for audio or chat functionality at present, as we

> are using discord for the meeting itself. This could change in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are using Discord for the meeting itself. This could change in the
```

future, and should not be discarded as possible features for the future.

## Considered options

::: content-hidden
List and describe some of the options, as well as some of the benefits
and drawbacks for each option.
:::

> Before deciding on FigJam we investigated a number of other tools. There

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There
```

Please include a fair comparison of those other tools.

is a list of open source retrospective tools available at [Project
Management
Planet](https://www.projectmanagementplanet.com/open-source-retrospectives-tools/),
which we used as a starting point. To see a brief overview of the tools
we looked at, see the original issue on GitHub: [Seedcase Project Team
Issue
184](https://github.com/seedcase-project/team/issues/184#issuecomment-2376838975)

## Decision outcome

We have decided to continue using FigJam for our retrospectives. The
functionality offered in the free version of the product is more than
enough for our needs, and we are happy with the tool. We will continue
to use it until such time as we find that it no longer meets our needs,
or until we find a better tool. This is mainly due to the fact that we
are familiar with the tool, and that we have been able to move our
existing archive of boards to our own account.

> ::: content-hidden What decision was made, use the form "We decided on
> CHOICE because of REASONS." :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This seems to have gotten mangled, so just removing it.

looking for alternatives. We collected information on a variety of
online open access tools, but more importantly, collated a list of
requirements and features that we need for our retrospectives. Towards
the end of investigating into other tools, we learned that we could use
the free version of FigJam.

### Requirements

The requirements and features we identified as necessary for a good
retrospective session can be divided up into three categories.

The first is the creation of the issues ('what was good', 'what can we
improve') on virtual post-its, the second the organisation of these
cards, and the third the overall functionality of the board.

#### Cards

The following features are needed for the cards:

-   They should be easy to create, edit, and delete.
-   They should not have a maximum length (or it should be quite long).
-   They should be movable.
-   They should have clear ownership.
-   They should be easy to read.
-   They should be able to have different colours.

We have not assigned a priority to these features at this point in time,
as we expect to continue with the current solution, but should we in

> future wish to change then we will need to make a prioritised list.

Author: Good idea!

#### Organisation of cards

The following features are needed for the organisation of the cards:

-   It should be easy to group cards.
-   It should be possible to keep groups of cards visually separate.
-   It should be possible to move groups of cards.
-   It should be possible to add comments and actions to cards.
    -   This should be possible to follow on screen for all

>         participants.

Author: I'm not sure, I feel that there is a slight difference between the overall board functionality, and the way that you work with the cards once they have been filled out. If you play with the other apps it is more clear that there is card manipulation and board manipulation. Not quite a clear in FigJam.

>         participants.

Reviewer 2: I mean that I would think that the nested point here, about "follow on screen for all participants", would fit under the requirements for the overall board functionality and not necessarily under the heading "organisation of cards"? But if you disagree, you can just resolve this conversation :)

>         participants.

Author: Oh - that makes more sense, I agree!

    -   There should not be a maximum length for comments.
-   It should be easy to convert cards to actions/issues.
-   It should be easy to navigate the board and get a visual overview of
    the cards.

At present we don't see a need to be able to vote on cards, and likewise
there is no need to archive or search for specific cards. This could
change and should not be discarded as possible features for the future.

#### Board functionality

The overall functionality of the board and individual sessions should
include the following:

-   It should be possible to save a retrospective session.
    -   This could include a timer function to keep the session on
        track.
-   It should be possible to archive a session, so that it is easy to

>     refer back to it.

Author: For me saving means, well saving, but archiving means saving something out of sight, so it is still saved, but it is also not cluttering the everyday view. Not that FigJam is good at it, but better than the others for now.

-   Because of the column layout it is not possible to move groups of
    cards in a way that allows for more than one or two groups to be
    visible at the same time.
-   It is not possible to change the colour (they are all white).
-   It is at present not clear how long a board is stored for, so it
    would need to be exported after each session, making it more
    difficult to refer back to previous sessions.
:::
:::

```{=html}
<!-- https://scrumlr.io/board/8b5ca88c-f97e-438d-898d-cf1c19e7aac8 
board created on the 1st November 2024-->
```

### Retro tool

We tested [Retro Tool](https://www.retrotool.app/) using their online
version, which is easy to use, and comes with a very short set of
documentation. The board has a standard layout which consists of four
columns: 'It worked well', 'We could improve', 'I want to ask about',
and for the final step 'We need to do'. The session is divided into four
steps, 'Brainstorm', 'Group and Vote', 'Add action items', and 'Done'.
You will need to move through these steps and there is no option to move
back. It is not possible to create an account, which also means that you
have no way of knowing who wrote which card.

> ::: columns ::: column \#### Benefits
> 
> -   It is easy to create and delete cards.
> -   The cards are easy to read.
> -   It is easy to group cards, and all cards are visible on the screen
>     at the same time.
> -   It is possible to moved groups of cards, although they can't be
>     moved between columns.
> -   It is possible to fit quite a few cards on the screen, making an
>     overview easy.
> -   It is possible to change the url to a custom format, thus making it
>     easier to share.
> -   There is an export function at the end.
> -   If using the custom url, it is possible to return to the board at a
>     later date, although it is not clear how long the board is stored
>     for.
> -   It is possible to share the board, and for more than one user to
>     work on it, although once you've moved to the next step you can't go
>     back. :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::: columns
::: column
#### Benefits

-   It is easy to create and delete cards.
-   The cards are easy to read.
-   It is easy to group cards, and all cards are visible on the screen
    at the same time.
-   It is possible to move groups of cards, although they can't be
    moved between columns.
-   It is possible to fit quite a few cards on the screen, making an
    overview easy.
-   It is possible to change the URL to a custom format, thus making it
    easier to share.
-   There is an export function at the end.
-   If using the custom URL, it is possible to return to the board at a
    later date, although it is not clear how long the board is stored
    for.
-   It is possible to share the board, and for more than one user to
    work on it, although once you've moved to the next step you can't go
    back. 
:::
```

Formatting got mangled.

::: column
#### Drawbacks

-   Cards can't be edited.
-   There is no obvious functionality to show who the author of various
    cards is.
-   It is not possible to move cards from one column to another.
-   There is no timer function.
-   The cards are not actually shown as cards (but as numbered
    comments), so it is impossible to change the colour of them.
-   It is not possible to add comments to cards.
-   The export function just creates a text file with all the cards.
-   There are no frills or entertaining features.

> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::
:::
```

Format got mangled.

### Refacto

We tested [Refacto](https://retro.davidje13.com/) using their online
version. It is slightly unclear if this corresponds to the version that
the team behind it is promoting on their [GitHub
site](https://github.com/davidje13/Refacto). The site requires a login
for the first user, subsequent users can access the board using the

> customised url and password. The board has a standard layout which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
customised URL and password. The board has a standard layout which
```

> consists of three columns: 'I', glad that', 'I'm wondering about', and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
consists of three columns: 'I'm glad that', 'I'm wondering about', and
```
